     A 3-INSTRUCTION FORTH     Sergeant

Copyright 1991 Frank Sergeant 


formatting and addresses changed April, 2007
frank@pygmy.utoh.org
http://pygmy.utoh.org





       A 3-INSTRUCTION FORTH FOR EMBEDDED SYSTEMS WORK

            Illustrated on the Motorola MC68HC11

                      by Frank Sergeant


*Abstract

     How many instructions does it take to make a 
Forth for target development work?  Does memory 
grow on trees?  Does the cost of the development 
system come out of your own pocket?  A 3-
instruction Forth makes Forth affordable for target 
systems with very limited memory.  It can be 
brought up quickly on strange new hardware.  You 
don't have to do without Forth because of memory or 
time limitations.  It only takes 66 bytes for the 
Motorola MC68HC11.  Full source is provided. 

*Literary Justifications

      I come to Forthifize the 68HC11 not to praise it.

 Had we but memory enough and time, 
     this wastefulness, Programmer, were no crime.
 The embedded system box is a private place and fine, 
     but none should there, I think, megabyte ROMs enshrine.

*Do You Want Forth on the Target Board?

     Yes.  In a FORML paper, it seems reasonable to assume 
you do want Forth on the target board, if possible, if you 
can afford it.  Without Forth, maybe without a monitor ROM 
of any sort, you might find yourself in this position:  You 
have to write some code, burn it into an EPROM, guess why it 
doesn't work, make changes to your code, burn another EPROM 
... and do this over and over until something begins to 
work.  Finally you get an LED to flash and your non-
programmer friends wonder why you are so excited over such a 
little thing!  You say there's got to be an easier way and 
start to wish you could afford expensive development 
systems.  
     
     But how do you put Forth on the target?  If you write 
your own, you might find yourself in that same situation as 
you burn EPROMs and wonder why the Forth doesn't run.  If 
you buy one, it might not work with your hardware 
configuration, it might be too expensive, it might not 
include full source.  You might not have time to do all this 
before starting on your real project.  The end product might 
not be able to afford the PCB space, ROM, and RAM that a 
Forth requires. 

*Let's Design the Simplest Possible Forth

     Might there be a way to make a very small Forth?  How 
much of the burden can we offload to the host system and 
what is the minimum that must be done in the target?  We are 
used to the idea of the host providing text editing and 
source storage services.  Let's see if it can also provide 
all the high-level code while the target provides only the 
primitives. 

     The absolute minimum the target must do, it seems to 
me, is fetch a byte, store a byte, and call a subroutine.  
Everything else can be done in high-level Forth on the host.  
(I'm assuming the host and target are connected over a 
serial line, and that sending and receiving serial bytes 
will be included as part of accomplishing the three 
primitive functions.)  With those three primitives, memory 
can be inspected and altered, new routines can be 
downloaded, and the new routines can be executed.  Let's 
call this a 3-instruction Forth.  "Everything else being the 
same," a 3-instruction Forth should be pretty easy to write 
and pretty easy to debug.  Let's start with a pseudocode 
description: 

*Pseudocode

     1. Initialize the processor.
     2. Initialize the serial port.
     3. Repeat the following forever:
        Get a byte from the serial port.
        If byte = 01  [fetch]
           A. Get address from the serial port.
           B. Fetch the byte from that address.
           C. Send the byte to the serial port.
        Else If byte = 02  [store]
           A. Get address from the serial port.
           B. Get a byte from the serial port.
           C. Store the byte at that address.
        Else If byte = 03  [call]
           A. Get address from the serial port.
           B. Jump to the subroutine at that address.
        End If.

     Step 1 and 2 include whatever housekeeping tasks are 
needed to set up the processor and the serial port such as 
initializing the stack and selecting various modes.  These 
steps are particularly simple on the 'HC11.  When it wakes 
up in its bootstrap mode, an internal ROM sets up the stack, 
turns on the serial port, and waits for a program to be 
downloaded over the serial line.  On the 'HC11, step 1 
consists of establishing addressability of the internal 
registers and ports.  This is done by loading Register X 
with the base address of the register space.  The 'HC11's 
serial out line wakes up in the "wire-or" mode.  The only 
thing we have to do for Step 2 is to un-wire-or it.  Doing 
so eliminates the necessity of putting a pullup resistor on 
that pin. 

     In the main part of the routine (step 3), the functions 
of getting a byte or getting an address from the serial port 
are required in a number of places, thus they are good 
candidates for subroutines.  Indeed, getting an address can 
make use of the get a byte subroutine.  A byte is sent back 
to the host in only one place, so there is no point in 
making that into a subroutine.  

*Philosophy?

     Yes, we could eliminate that last instruction and still 
be able to set and examine all of the target's RAM and 
registers.  Unfortunately we wouldn't be able to test actual 
code on the target.  With only two instructions (fetch and 
store) we could exercise the devil out of the hardware, but 
we really need that third instruction (call) in order to 
extend the Forth.  Thus, I would not be entirely happy to 
call it Forth with only the first two instructions. 

     Is it fair to call it a Forth even with all three 
instructions?  After all, it lacks a data stack, headers, 
either the inner or the outer interpreter (I vacillate on 
this).  It relies on the host (but, then, which target Forth 
boards connected to a PC over a serial line do not rely on 
their hosts to at least some extent?).  It is extensible and 
even the main loop can be extended to test for codes in 
addition to 01, 02, and 03.  So, is it a Forth or not?  I 
lean toward "yes."  It has the Forth attributes of 
simplicity, economy, and (I hope) elegance.  What, though, 
about linking together calls to earlier routines in order to 
build later routines?  The most obvious approach is to build 
simple assembly language routines on the host and download 
them to the target one at a time and test them.  Then 
download higher level assembly routines that call those 
earlier ones.  This is the most memory efficient approach.  
If you do have extra RAM available on the system then you 
can use the 3-instruction Forth to build and test a full 
Forth, and then use it.  Either way, starting with a 
3-instruction Forth you get to work in an interactive, 
Forth-like environment. 

*Can We Afford It?

     "But wait," you say, "the 68HC11 has only 192 bytes of 
onboard RAM (or 256 or 512, depending on the version) -- 
surely it's not big enough for a Forth or any other 
monitor!"  No, not for a conventional monitor or a 
conventional Forth.  However, it's got memory to spare for a 
3-instruction Forth, and that's all we need.  This 3-
instruction Forth for the 'HC11 only takes 66 bytes on the 
target.  It was created with Pygmy Forth running on a PC.  
Following the source code listing is a listing of the actual 
66 bytes of 'HC11 machine language, so you should be able to 
use it with any Forth running on any host.  An old slow PC 
is adequate; no fast, expensive development system is 
required. 

     Once that tiny program is running you can use it to do 
everything else you need.  This technique works with all 
micros, but it is especially easy with the Motorola 68HC11 
family.  The first reason is that I'm including a listing of 
the program right here.  If you are not using an 'HC11 then 
you'll have to write an equivalent program for another 
micro.  The second reason is the 'HC11's lovely serial boot 
loader mode.  This eliminates the EPROM burning stage and 
lets you download the monitor over the serial line.   

     The 68HC11 gives you another bonus.  In the bootstrap 
mode, the internal ROM initializes the chip and turns on the 
built-in serial port.  With another micro you'll need to 
write your own code to do this step.  If the micro does not 
have an on-board serial port you'll need to add one, either 
externally with a serial or parallel port chip, or with on-
board I/O lines. 

*Distributed Development

     The 3 instructions are 
        XC@       fetch a byte
        XC!       store a byte
        XCALL     jump to a subroutine

This is a "tokenized" Forth.  The host sends a single byte 
code to the 68HC11.  The code 01 stands for XC@, the code 02 
stands for XC!, the code 03 stands for XCALL, and any other 
code is ignored.  When the host wants to read a byte it 
first sends the 01 code to indicate an XC@ instruction and 
then sends two more bytes to tell the 68HC11 which address 
should be read.  Upon receiving the 01 code the 68HC11 
executes the XC@ instruction, which collects the two byte 
address, reads the byte at that address, and sends the value 
to the host.  The XC! instruction works similarly.  The host 
sends the 02 code followed by two bytes for the address and 
one byte for the value to be stored.  For the XCALL 
instruction the host sends the 03 code followed by two bytes 
for the address.  Using the XC! instruction you can download 
short subroutines for testing, or long programs if the 
target has enough RAM, or you can program the onboard EEPROM 
or EPROM if present.  Once the routine is downloaded, the 
host can send the XCALL instruction to cause the 68HC11 to 
jump to the newly downloaded routine.  If the routine ends 
with a return instruction (RTS) then control will 
automatically return to the 3-instruction monitor. 

     Because all of the 68HC11's status, control, and I/O 
registers are memory mapped, you can use XC@ & XC! to read 
and set them as if they were regular memory.  On other 
micros, you might need more than the 3 instructions if you 
need to set registers or I/O ports that aren't memory 
mapped.  In that case you might need a 5 or 6-instruction 
Forth. 

*Let's Your Forth and My Forth Do Lunch

     "Wait another minute," you say, "I'm not going to sit 
there and type <value> <address> XC! over and over in order 
to download a program!"  No, of course not.  You also run 
Forth on the host and let the host's Forth do all that work 
for you.  You type high-level commands and the host's Forth 
breaks all the work down into the 3 simple commands the 
target Forth understands.  This is distributed embedded 
systems development.  Some work is done on the host and some 
on the target.  It allows you the full power of Forth and 
the full power of an interpreter without requiring extensive 
resources on the target. 

     By the power of an interpreter I mean you can examine 
and set registers and memory interactively from the 
keyboard.  This allows you to exercise the hardware 
directly.  This is so much faster and more convenient than 
writing your whole program, burning an EPROM, and wondering 
why it doesn't work.  This 3-instruction Forth approach 
gives you the power of a development system for free if you 
are using the 68HC11 and for cheap if you are using any 
other micro. 

*Sample Session

     If you can type 003F XC@ . and understand that you've 
just displayed the value of the 68HC11's byte at address 
$003F then you know just about everything you need to know.  
Here's a sample session.  

     Let's pretend I've wired the 68HC11 so that port A pin 
01 controls an LED.  I can't remember whether a 0 or a 1 
turns it on and I'm not sure whether it works.  I look in 
the data book and find that address zero is the port A data 
address.  Although the LED only uses a single bit of port A 
I don't have anything else connected so I'll just set the 
whole byte on or off and see what happens. 

        HEX
        0 0 XC!      ( the LED goes on)
        FF 0 XC!     ( the LED goes off)

Now I want to see something more entertaining so I'll write 
a little Forth program to make the LED flash.  A non-Forther 
might think of this as defining keyboard macros. 

   DECIMAL
   : LED-ON ( -)  0 0 XC! ;
   : LED-OFF  ( -) $FF 0 XC!  ;
   : DELAY ( -)   500 MS    ;
   : FLASHES ( # -)   FOR  LED-ON DELAY LED-OFF DELAY NEXT ;
   25 FLASHES   ( for about 25 seconds of entertainment)
     or
   10000 FLASHES ( for nearly 3 hours of boredom)

     MS stands for miliseconds and kills time, thus 500 MS 
kills about 1/2 a second.  If you don't have that word in 
your Forth system, you can define it with something like 

           : MS  FOR    2000 FOR  NEXT     NEXT   ;
           
then type 10000 MS and see if it takes about 10 seconds.  If 
not, retype the definition of MS with a larger or smaller 
number than 2000 until you get it close enough. 

     Note that all of the above definitions are in the 
host's dictionary, not the target's.  They take up no room 
at all in the target's memory.  Only the 3 instructions 
(which we invoke with the host instructions XC@, XC!, & 
XCALL) are present in the target's memory. 

*The Code
          
     The following code loads under Pygmy Forth running on 
an PC to create a memory image on the PC of the 3-
instruction Forth to be run on the 68HC11.  It assumes a 
68HC11 assembler has already been loaded on top of Pygmy. 
                                                                         
        ( 3-instruction Forth monitor for 'HC11 )

 ( name the 'HC11's serial communication registers)
     $2E CONSTANT SCSR ( addr of 'HC11's SCI Status Register)
     $2F CONSTANT SCDR ( addr of 'HC11's SCI Data Register)

 ( provide labels for the two subroutines)
     VARIABLE 'GET-BYTE
     VARIABLE 'GET-ADDR

  ( how many bytes long is the 3-instruction Forth?)
     VARIABLE MONITOR-LENGTH

 ( define two 'HC11 assembly language macros)
     : GET-BYTE, ( -)  'GET-BYTE @ BSR,  ;
     : GET-ADDR, ( -)  'GET-ADDR @ BSR,  ;
                                                                         
 ( create the 3-instr Forth)
   CODE MONITOR         ( do NOT execute this word on the PC)  
      CLRA, CLRB, XGDX,  ( now X points to base of registers)
      CLRA, $28 ,X STA,  ( un wire-or port D)

     ( define 2 subroutines)
      NEVER, IF,  ( branch around the 2 subroutines)

        ( get-byte)  HERE 'GET-BYTE !
        HERE   SCSR  ,X   $20 BRCLR, ( wait for incoming char)
                       SCDR  ,X LDA, ( read serial port)
                                RTS, ( byte is in register A)

        ( get-addr)  HERE 'GET-ADDR !
                           GET-BYTE, 
                                TAB, ( 1st byte in Reg B)
                           GET-BYTE, ( 2nd byte in Reg A) 
                               XGDY, ( transfer to Reg Y)
                                RTS, ( addr is in register Y)
      THEN,

     ( start the endless main loop)
      BEGIN, 
        GET-BYTE,   ( get command code of either 1, 2, or 3)
        1 #, CMPA, 0=, IF,
          ( instruction XC@ was requested)
                           GET-ADDR,  
                           0 ,Y LDA,
         HERE  SCSR  ,X   $80 BRCLR, ( wait for Transmit)
                                     ( Data Register Empty)
                      SCDR  ,X  STA, ( send byte to PC)
        ELSE,
        2 #, CMPA, 0=, IF,
          ( instruction XC! was requested)
                           GET-ADDR,
                           GET-BYTE,
                           0 ,Y STA,
        ELSE,
        3 #, CMPA, 0=, IF,
          ( instruction XCALL was requested)
                           GET-ADDR,
                           0 ,Y JSR,
        THEN,  THEN,  THEN,
      NEVER, UNTIL,  ( branch back to beginning of main loop)
   END-CODE

 ( calculate how long the 3-instruction Forth is)
   HERE  ' MONITOR -  MONITOR-LENGTH !


     In order to load the above you must have an 'HC11 
assembler running on your PC.  You can download such an 
assembler from the Forth roundtable on GEnie -- do a search 
in the files section for 68HC11.  However, the whole point 
of the above code is to create the 66 byte image of the 3-
instruction Forth.  Here is a hex dump of those 66 bytes: 

0000   4F 5F 8F 4F A7 28 20  F  1F 2E 20 FC A6 2F 39 8D 
0010   F7 16 8D F4 18 8F 39 8D  EF 81  1 26  D 8D F0 18  
0020   A6  0 1F 2E 80 FC A7 2F  20 16 81  2 26  9 8D DF 
0030   8D D6 18 A7  0 20  9 81   3 26  5 8D D2 18 AD  0  
0040   20 D5 
     
     It would be a simple matter to comma those 66 bytes 
directly into your host Forth, and thus not require the 
'HC11 assembler.  Although, surely you'd want the assembler 
for other work you'd do on the 'HC11, wouldn't you?  
Something like 

     HEX
     CREATE MONITOR
       4F C, 5F C, 8F C, 4F C, A7 C,  ...  20 C, D5 C,

would serve to build the memory image.  Or, you could toss 
all the numbers on the stack, copy them to the return stack 
(to retrieve the first bytes first), and do all the comma-
ing in a loop, as in 

     DECIMAL
     VARIABLE MONITOR-LENGTH    66 MONITOR-LENGTH !
     : COMMA-THEM-IN ( ... -)
       66 FOR POP SWAP PUSH PUSH NEXT  (   ) ( rs: ... )
                 ( now the bytes are on the return stack)
       66 FOR POP POP C, PUSH NEXT  (   ) ( rs:   )
                       ( now the bytes are in memory)  ;

      HEX
      4F 5F 8F 4F A7 28 20  F  1F 2E 20 FC A6 2F 39 8D 
      F7 16 8D F4 18 8F 39 8D  EF 81  1 26  D 8D F0 18  
      A6  0 1F 2E 80 FC A7 2F  20 16 81  2 26  9 8D DF 
      8D D6 18 A7  0 20  9 81   3 26  5 8D D2 18 AD  0  
      20 D5  ( put the 66 bytes on the data stack)

      CREATE MONITOR
          COMMA-THEM-IN

*Downloading

     Either way you do it, the next step is to download that 
image to the 'HC11.  The following words are defined on the 
host to allow the 3-instruction Forth to be downloaded to 
the 'HC11. 

      .OUT  ( a # -) copies a string to the 'HC11.
      ?EMIT ( c -)   emits a character if it is displayable,
                     else prints its ASCII value.
      .OUTE ( a # -) copies the string to the 'HC11
                     and displays the 'HC11's echo.
      ?HEX  ( -)     emits hex value of any waiting 
                     serial characters.
      DL    ( -)     downloads the 3-instruction Forth
                     to the 'HC11. 

      : .OUT ( a # -)  FOR DUP C@ SER-OUT 1+ NEXT DROP ;             

      : ?EMIT ( c -) DUP $20 $7F BETWEEN IF EMIT ELSE . THEN ;         

      : .OUTE ( a # -)                                                 
        FOR DUP C@ SER-OUT  SER-IN ?EMIT  1+ NEXT DROP ;
      : ?HEX ( -) BASE @ HEX 
           BEGIN SER-IN? WHILE SER-IN 3 U.R REPEAT BASE ! ;

      : DL ( -)  ( download the 3-instruction Forth)
        $FF SER-OUT  ( tell 'HC11 to pay attention)
        ['] MONITOR ( a)  MONITOR-LENGTH @  ( a #)
        .OUT 1000 FOR NEXT ?HEX     ;

*Using the Three Primitives

     Once the 3-instruction Forth has been downloaded to the 
'HC11, those primitives can be used from the host.  Here are 
some examples. 

      FLIP  ( hhll - llhh) converts Intel byte order to
                           Motorola order, and vice-versa.
      ADDR-OUT ( a -) sends a 16-bit address to the 'HC11 as
                      two bytes.
      XC@   ( a - c) fetches byte from the 'HC11's address a.
      XC!   ( c a -) stores byte to the 'HC11's address a.
      XCALL ( a -)   makes 'HC11 jump to a subroutine at 
                     address a.
      XDUMP ( a - a+16) dumps 16 bytes starting at 'HC11's 
                        address a.
      XDU   ( a # - a') shorthand to repeat XDUMP for as
                        many lines as you wish.

      : FLIP ( hhll - llhh) DUP $100 * SWAP $100 U/ OR ;

      : ADDR-OUT ( a -)  DUP SER-OUT   FLIP SER-OUT   ;

      : XC@ ( a - c) 1 SER-OUT   ADDR-OUT  SER-IN  ;

      : XC! ( c a -) 2 SER-OUT   ADDR-OUT  SER-OUT  ;

      : XCALL ( a -) 3 SER-OUT  ADDR-OUT  ;

      : XDUMP ( a - a')
        HEX CR DUP 4 U.R 2 SPACES ( a)
        DUP ( a a) 2 FOR
                       8 FOR DUP XC@ 3 U.R 1+ NEXT
                       SPACE
                     NEXT DROP  2 SPACES
        ( a) 2 FOR
                  8 FOR DUP XC@ DUP $20 $7F WITHIN NOT
                        IF DROP $2E THEN EMIT 1+
                    NEXT SPACE
               NEXT ;

      : XDU ( a # - a') FOR ?SCROLL XDUMP NEXT  DROP  ;




*Bibliography

     Harold M. Martin, "Developing a Tethered Forth Model," 
SIGForth Newsletter, Vol. 2, No. 3. 

     Brad Rodriguez, "A Z8 Talker and Host," The Computer 
Journal, issue 51, July/August, 1991. 


