file pfaaaa.txt (this is the "readme" file)



A Simple Implementation of the Kermit Protocol
               in Pygmy Forth

              by Frank Sergeant
              frank@pygmy.utoh.org
              http://pygmy.utoh.org

[ note April, 2007  I have corrected my email
  and web addresses above.  References below
  to www.eskimo.com are no longer valid.  See
  pygmy.utoh.org instead (the Kermit files are
  bundled with Pygmy version 1.7). ]

See the announcement file (pfaaaa.ann) or the source code
files for terms of use and distribution (basically free).

The file names for the plain text files correspond to the
file naming convention recommended by the Columbia
University Kermit Project. The files begin with the prefix
"pf" which stands for Pygmy Forth.  The files in plain
text format should be available on the Kermit ftp site as

  ftp://kermit.columbia.edu/kermit/c/pf*

Those files, plus the non-plain-text files (which do not
necessarily begin with the prefix "pf", are available in
the pfkerm.zip file on the Kermit ftp site as

  ftp://kermit.columbia.edu/kermit/archives/pfkerm.zip

and also on my web site

  http://www.eskimo.com/~pygmy

Here is a description of the file contents:

    pfaaaa.ann
         The announcement file.

    pfaaaa.txt
         This file (the "readme" file).

    pfkerm.doc
         a copy of the article "A Simple Implementation
         of the Kermit Protocol in Pygmy Forth"
         which appeared in the May/June and July/Aug
         1997 issues (Volume XIX, Numbers 1 and 2) of
         _Forth Dimensions_, published by the Forth
         Interest Group.

    pfkerm.msg
         Email correspondence between Frank da Cruz and
         me correcting and commenting upon the article.

    pfkerm.src
         The source code in plain text format.

    pfkerm.txt
         The shadow comments in plain text format.

    kermit.scr
         The source code as a Forth block file.
         (This is not a plain text file.)

    kermit.dow
         The associated "shadow" documentation file as
         a Forth block file.
         (This is not a plain text file.)

    listing.txt
         A text file containing a side-by-side listing
         of the source and shadow files.  This has more
         than 80 columns, so it is included in pfkerm.zip
         but not on the plain text ftp site, but is
         readable as plain text if your viewer supports
         132 columns.


In order to run the code, you would need a copy of
Pygmy Forth version 1.5 for DOS (pygmy15.zip) or later,
available on my web site.  You would also need serial
port routines.  An article I wrote for _The Computer
Journal_ might help you get started with the serial
port routines.  Serial port routines are included in
Pygmy version 1.7.


If you use a different Forth, the code would need some
modifications, but still might get you off to a good
start.


  -- Frank Sergeant

(end of file pfaaa.txt)
